idea.md, before:

### Terminology
- TLS v1.2 RFC: [TLS v1.2 protocol](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246)
- supported cipher suites: `tls-pongd` is implemented for the following CipherSuites, see [TLS v1.2: CipherSuites](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3268) for details
  - `TLS_DHE_RSA_AES_256_CBC_SHA`
  - `TLS_DHE_RSA_AES_256_CBC_SHA256`
- `proxy `: `tls-pongd`
- `server`: IRC/Jabber/whatever TLS server
- `client`: `tls-pong-client`
- `control channel`: encrypted connection between `client` and `proxy`
- `connection id`: the numeric ID of an open connection
- `pong interval`: the interval for how often the `client` should dispatch pong messages

### General outline

The user wants to stay connected to a service which requires PONG messages sent over TLS at deterministic intervals and using deterministic PONG messages.

`tls-pongd` accomplishes this by running a `proxy` on an always-available untrusted machine, tunneling the end-to-end-encrypted TLS connection from the `client` to the `server`.

The `client` encrypts the deterministic PONG messages ahead of time and sends them to the `proxy` over the `control channel` without revealing the encryption or MAC keys for the session.

The `client` reveals the TLS sequence number of each of the PONG records (`seq_num`) as well as the `seq_num` for each regular data packet to enable the `proxy` to determine which PONG messages will be appropriate in a given setting. If the `proxy` receives a regular packet whose `seq_num` it has already replaced using a PONG, the `proxy` must inform the `client` that it needs to resend the record under a different `seq_num` over the `control channel` and reject the record.

Incoming messages are queued for the user and must be ACK'ed before they're deleted from the queue. This enables a user to keep a reliable and consistent backlog of incoming messages.

### Record structure details

Excerpt from [RFC 5246](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246#page-22)
```
      struct {
          ContentType type;
          ProtocolVersion version;
          uint16 length;
          select (SecurityParameters.cipher_type) {
              case stream: GenericStreamCipher;
              case block:  GenericBlockCipher;
              case aead:   GenericAEADCipher;
          } fragment;
      } TLSCiphertext;

      struct {
          opaque IV[SecurityParameters.record_iv_length];
          block-ciphered struct {
              opaque content[TLSCompressed.length];
              opaque MAC[SecurityParameters.mac_length];
              uint8 padding[GenericBlockCipher.padding_length];
              uint8 padding_length;
          };
      } GenericBlockCipher;
```
The `IV` is a random value.

The MAC is computed as follows: [(details in RFC 5246)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246#section-6.2.3.1)

```
      MAC(MAC_write_key, seq_num +
                            TLSCompressed.type +
                            TLSCompressed.version +
                            TLSCompressed.length +
                            TLSCompressed.fragment);
```

The `MAC_write_key` protects the integrity of the records and is known only to the `client`, which makes the `proxy` unable to substitute the messages sent by the `client` with its own messages.

TLS uses different sets of encryption and MAC keys for "write" and "read" operations respectively, which makes `proxy` unable to substitute incoming messages with PONGs that were queued with the `proxy`.

Since the `seq_num` is not sent in cleartext, we need to continually tag records sent over the `control channel` with the associated `seq_num` to enable the `proxy` to keep track of which PONGs are invalidated by outgoing messages.

### Protocol considerations

- It is important that regular protocol messages sent by the `client` do not span across several records since the `proxy` has the capability to replace any valid record with a PONG record. For IRC this means that the plaintext content of all records must end with `0x0d 0a`, as must all PONGs.

- The control channel must implement the following operations from the `client`:

  - `CONNECT` `{address}` `{port}`
    - return:
      - on success: `CONNECT_ANSWER {connection id} {address} {port}`
      - on failure: `CONNECT_ERROR {address} {port}`
    - action: Establish a TCP connection to the given address and port

  - `OUTGOING` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}` `seq_num count` `{encrypted TLS records}`
    - return: none
      - unless PONGs have already been with seq_num lower than `{seq_num offset} + {seq_num count}` in which case a `STATUS_ANSWER` for the `{connection id}` is returned
    - action: drop PONGs with `{seq_num}` lower than `{seq_num offset} + `{seq_num count}`, if there are any

  - `QUEUE` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}` `{count seq_num}` `{PONG record [seq_num offset]}` `{PONG record [seq_num ...]}` `{PONG record [seq_num offset + count seq_num]}`
    - return: `STATUS_ANSWER` for the `{connection id}`
    - action: store the PONG records in the queue for the given `{connection id}`

  - `ACK` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}`
    - return: none
    - action: the `proxy` erases all queued PONGs up to and including `{seq_num offset}`
      - If the `{connection id}` has failed, a `{seq_num offset}` of `0` may be used to erase all `proxy` state related to `{connection id}`

  - `STATUS` `{first connection id}` `{last connection id}`
    - return: `STATUS_ANSWER` `{count of status tuples to follow}` and `[[` {connection id}` `{address}` `{port}` `{current seq_num}` `{count of queued PONG records}` `]]` for each connected `{connection id}`. if a connection has failed, `seq_num = 0` is sent
    - action: none

  - `FETCH` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}` `{max seq_num}`
    - return: `INCOMING` `{count of queued PONGs}` `{seq_num offset}` `{seq_num count}` `{received TLS records}`

  - `SUBSCRIBE` `{connection id}`
    - return: see *action*
    - action: continually sends `INCOMING` messages for each received record for the duration of the lifetimes of either `control channel` or `{connection id}`

Commit message:

add paragraph about server/client write MAC keys

idea.md, after:

### Terminology
- TLS v1.2 RFC: [TLS v1.2 protocol](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246)
- supported cipher suites: `tls-pongd` is implemented for the following CipherSuites, see [TLS v1.2: CipherSuites](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3268) for details
  - `TLS_DHE_RSA_AES_256_CBC_SHA`
  - `TLS_DHE_RSA_AES_256_CBC_SHA256`
- `proxy `: `tls-pongd`
- `server`: IRC/Jabber/whatever TLS server
- `client`: `tls-pong-client`
- `control channel`: encrypted connection between `client` and `proxy`
- `connection id`: the numeric ID of an open connection
- `pong interval`: the interval for how often the `client` should dispatch pong messages

### General outline

The user wants to stay connected to a service which requires PONG messages sent over TLS at deterministic intervals and using deterministic PONG messages.

`tls-pongd` accomplishes this by running a `proxy` on an always-available untrusted machine, tunneling the end-to-end-encrypted TLS connection from the `client` to the `server`.

The `client` encrypts the deterministic PONG messages ahead of time and sends them to the `proxy` over the `control channel` without revealing the encryption or MAC keys for the session.

The `client` reveals the TLS sequence number of each of the PONG records (`seq_num`) as well as the `seq_num` for each regular data packet to enable the `proxy` to determine which PONG messages will be appropriate in a given setting. If the `proxy` receives a regular packet whose `seq_num` it has already replaced using a PONG, the `proxy` must inform the `client` that it needs to resend the record under a different `seq_num` over the `control channel` and reject the record.

Incoming messages are queued for the user and must be ACK'ed before they're deleted from the queue. This enables a user to keep a reliable and consistent backlog of incoming messages.

### Record structure details

Excerpt from [RFC 5246](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246#page-22)
```
      struct {
          ContentType type;
          ProtocolVersion version;
          uint16 length;
          select (SecurityParameters.cipher_type) {
              case stream: GenericStreamCipher;
              case block:  GenericBlockCipher;
              case aead:   GenericAEADCipher;
          } fragment;
      } TLSCiphertext;

      struct {
          opaque IV[SecurityParameters.record_iv_length];
          block-ciphered struct {
              opaque content[TLSCompressed.length];
              opaque MAC[SecurityParameters.mac_length];
              uint8 padding[GenericBlockCipher.padding_length];
              uint8 padding_length;
          };
      } GenericBlockCipher;
```
The `IV` is a random value.

The MAC is computed as follows: [(details in RFC 5246)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246#section-6.2.3.1)

```
      MAC(MAC_write_key, seq_num +
                            TLSCompressed.type +
                            TLSCompressed.version +
                            TLSCompressed.length +
                            TLSCompressed.fragment);
```

The (`client`) `MAC_write_key` protects the integrity of the records and is known only to the `client` and the `server`, which makes the `proxy` unable to substitute the messages sent by the `client` with its own messages.

TLS uses different sets of encryption and MAC keys for "client write" and "server write" operations respectively, which makes `proxy` unable to substitute incoming messages with PONGs that were queued with the `proxy`. See [RFC 5246 section 6.3](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246#section-6.3) for details.

Since the `seq_num` is not sent in cleartext, we need to continually tag records sent over the `control channel` with the associated `seq_num` to enable the `proxy` to keep track of which PONGs are invalidated by outgoing messages.

### Protocol considerations

- It is important that regular protocol messages sent by the `client` do not span across several records since the `proxy` has the capability to replace any valid record with a PONG record. For IRC this means that the plaintext content of all records must end with `0x0d 0a`, as must all PONGs.

- The control channel must implement the following operations from the `client`:

  - `CONNECT` `{address}` `{port}`
    - return:
      - on success: `CONNECT_ANSWER {connection id} {address} {port}`
      - on failure: `CONNECT_ERROR {address} {port}`
    - action: Establish a TCP connection to the given address and port

  - `OUTGOING` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}` `seq_num count` `{encrypted TLS records}`
    - return: none
      - unless PONGs have already been with seq_num lower than `{seq_num offset} + {seq_num count}` in which case a `STATUS_ANSWER` for the `{connection id}` is returned
    - action: drop PONGs with `{seq_num}` lower than `{seq_num offset} + `{seq_num count}`, if there are any

  - `QUEUE` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}` `{count seq_num}` `{PONG record [seq_num offset]}` `{PONG record [seq_num ...]}` `{PONG record [seq_num offset + count seq_num]}`
    - return: `STATUS_ANSWER` for the `{connection id}`
    - action: store the PONG records in the queue for the given `{connection id}`

  - `ACK` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}`
    - return: none
    - action: the `proxy` erases all queued PONGs up to and including `{seq_num offset}`
      - If the `{connection id}` has failed, a `{seq_num offset}` of `0` may be used to erase all `proxy` state related to `{connection id}`

  - `STATUS` `{first connection id}` `{last connection id}`
    - return: `STATUS_ANSWER` `{count of status tuples to follow}` and `[[` {connection id}` `{address}` `{port}` `{current seq_num}` `{count of queued PONG records}` `]]` for each connected `{connection id}`. if a connection has failed, `seq_num = 0` is sent
    - action: none

  - `FETCH` `{connection id}` `{seq_num offset}` `{max seq_num}`
    - return: `INCOMING` `{count of queued PONGs}` `{seq_num offset}` `{seq_num count}` `{received TLS records}`

  - `SUBSCRIBE` `{connection id}`
    - return: see *action*
    - action: continually sends `INCOMING` messages for each received record for the duration of the lifetimes of either `control channel` or `{connection id}`
